Introduce Clustered Table to delta spec (#2264)
delta-io/delta: PROTOCOL.md

    "dataChange": true,
    "baseRowId": 4071,
    "defaultRowCommitVersion": 41,

>     "clusteringProvider": "liquid",

Reviewer: As https://github.com/delta-io/delta/pull/2264/files#r1393446762 says, we cannot have both `clusteringProvider` and `partitionValues` set at the same time.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, where is that? I can't find it anywhere in this file?
https://github.com/dabao521/delta/blob/fe34ad1764a0ac212ab8c22e3d469e7f6541f598/PROTOCOL.md
(searching for all instances of `partitionValues`)

Reviewer: Search for "The following is an example add action"

Author: I added a new writer rule that disallows partitioned table here. Let's discuss in the follow up [PR](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/pull/2294/files#diff-62d56fa1c25dda8d49ccdbf9ea31df4576f84625706d54613dff0acc8f974d97R1083). thanks

A table is defined as a clustered table through the following criteria:
- When the feature `clustering` exists in the table `protocol`'s `writerFeatures`, then we say that the table is a clustered table.
  The feature `domainMetadata` is required in the table `protocol`'s `writerFeatures`.

Enablement:
- The table must be on Writer Version 7.
- The feature `clustering` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `writerFeatures`.

## Writer Requirements for Clustered Table

When the Clustered Table is supported (when the `writerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `clustering`), then:
- Writers must write out [per-file statistics](#per-file-statistics) and per-column statistics for clustering columns in `add` action. 
  Failure to collect per-column statistics for clustering columns will result in an error when defining a clustered table or making changes to the clustering columns.
- Writers must track clustering column names in a `domainMetadata` action with `delta.clustering` as the `domain` and a `configuration` containing all clustering column names.
  If [Column Mapping](#column-mapping) is enabled, the physical column names should be used.

> - When a clustering implementation clusters files, writers must incorporate a `tag`  with `CLUSTERED_BY` as the key and the name of the clustering implementation as the corresponding value in `add` action.

Reviewer 2: Newly inserted files have not been clustered yet, so any implementation can "claim" them if it gets there first? I guess that makes sense, but wanted to double check that this is the intent. Should we update the spec to talk about this? That the writer is not required to cluster any given file at any particular time (but still must write accurate stats); but if/when it chooses to cluster a given file, then it must store the CLUSTERED_BY tag?

Reviewer: +1

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When a clustering implementation clusters files, writers must incorporate a `tag`  with `CLUSTERED_BY` as the key and the name of the clustering implementation as the corresponding value in the `add` actions for the clustered files.
```

Author: fixed

  - A clustering implementation must only cluster files that belong to the implementation or files that do not have the `CLUSTERED_BY` tag (i.e., unclustered).

>   - A clustering implementation is free to add additional information such as adding a new metadata domain to keep track of its metadata.

Reviewer 2: user domain, right?

# Clustered Table

The Clustered Table feature facilitates the physical clustering of rows that share similar values on a predefined set of clustering columns.
This enhances query performance when selective filters are applied to these clustering columns through data skipping.
Clustering columns must be specified during the initial definition of a clustered table, and they can be modified after the table has been created.

A table is defined as a clustered table through the following criteria:
- When the feature `clustering` exists in the table `protocol`'s `writerFeatures`, then we say that the table is a clustered table.
  The feature `domainMetadata` is required in the table `protocol`'s `writerFeatures`.

Enablement:
- The table must be on Writer Version 7.
- The feature `clustering` must exist in the table `protocol`'s `writerFeatures`.

## Writer Requirements for Clustered Table

When the Clustered Table is supported (when the `writerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `clustering`), then:
- Writers must write out [per-file statistics](#per-file-statistics) and per-column statistics for clustering columns in `add` action. 

>   Failure to collect per-column statistics for clustering columns will result in an error when defining a clustered table or making changes to the clustering columns.

Reviewer 3: What is "failure to collect"? Is that an error in the collection process? I think what this is trying to say is that when a column is added to the list of clustering columns, then it is required that all files in the table have statistics for these columns.

Author: just reworded this sentence as you suggest and let me know if that makes more sense now.

> - Writers must track clustering column names in a `domainMetadata` action with `delta.clustering` as the `domain` and a `configuration` containing all clustering column names.

Reviewer 3: Multiple notes on this:
1. Let's put this first. This seems like the starting point.
2. How are the column names stored inside this `domainMetadata`? As a comma separated list? What if the column name contains a comma? (Using physical names avoids the latter issue, I think. Note that the spec does _not_ currently constrain the physical column names, but Parquet doesn't support a particular set of characters in column names, so there can't be commas in physical column names.)

Author: > Let's put this first. This seems like the starting point.

Moved to the first bullet.

> How are the column names stored inside this domainMetadata? As a comma separated list? What if the column name contains a comma? (Using physical names avoids the latter issue, I think. Note that the spec does not currently constrain the physical column names, but Parquet doesn't support a particular set of characters in column names, so there can't be commas in physical column names.)

Good point. I think we can use encoding that supports special characters like comma. I am thinking to 
encode column names into a Json array. But let me know if you have any concern on that.

Reviewer 2: The spec definitely needs to include the schema of the new metadata domain. String, array of strings, etc don't parse the same at all. Whatever we choose, an actual example in the spec would help a lot. 

Using the physical column names helps because as you say they won't ever contain whitespace or commas that could confuse a string splitter.

Author: Sounds good, I added an example json encoded `DomainMetadata` action at the end of this section below

  If [Column Mapping](#column-mapping) is enabled, the physical column names should be used.
- When a clustering implementation clusters files, writers must incorporate a `tag`  with `CLUSTERED_BY` as the key and the name of the clustering implementation as the corresponding value in `add` action.

>   - A clustering implementation must only cluster files that belong to the implementation or files that do not have the `CLUSTERED_BY` tag (i.e., unclustered).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - By default, a clustering implementation must only recluster files that have tag `CLUSTERED_BY`set to the name of the same clustering implementation, or to the names of other clustering implementations that are superseded by the current clustering implementation. In addition, a clustering implementation may cluster any files that do not have the `CLUSTERED_BY` tag (i.e., unclustered files).
```

Author: fixed

>   - Writer is not required to cluster a specific file at any specific moment though it is still obligated to record accurate statistics. However, if it decides to cluster a particular file, it must include the CLUSTERED_BY tag.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this line adds anything.

Reviewer 3: The line two bullets above says the same thing as the last part of this sentence. When you cluster a file, you must set the `CLUSTERED_BY` tag. The middle part is also already covered by the earlier bullets (you must record accurate stats). The first part of the line only says that writers are not obligated to cluster files. That part is new. If anything, this line should say only that, and nothing else.
```suggestion
  - Writer is not required to cluster a specific file at any specific moment.
```

  In particular, writers should set `delta.rowTracking.preserved` in the `tags` of the `commitInfo` action to `true` if no rows are updated or copied.
  Writers should set that flag to false otherwise.

# Clustered Table

The Clustered Table feature facilitates the physical clustering of rows that share similar values on a predefined set of clustering columns.
This enhances query performance when selective filters are applied to these clustering columns through data skipping.

> Clustering columns must be specified during the initial definition of a clustered table, and they can be modified after the table has been created.

Reviewer: So should `ALTER TABLE ... CLUSTER BY` automatically add the "clustering" table feature. I think that's the decision we need to make.

> Clustering columns must be specified during the initial definition of a clustered table, and they can be modified after the table has been created.

Reviewer 2: Does the SQL syntax need to be part of the Delta spec? Seems like more of a Delta client thing? As in, there's nothing in the spec that requires nor forbids changing the clustering after a table was created... and the decision of one client to add/change clustering shouldn't impact other clients' ability to consume the resulting table? If we think there could be interactions, we should capture those in the spec. 

For example, maybe it's ok to add/remove clustering columns but not cluster by a completely different set of columns? (but if we can add and remove... it just takes a few steps to completely change the column set).

> Clustering columns must be specified during the initial definition of a clustered table, and they can be modified after the table has been created.

Reviewer: I think the question here is whether we should allow adding the `clustering` table feature _after_ table creation. The current wording, I think, is saying that we can only add the `clustering` table feature during table creation. Any strong opinion here?

As long as the `clustering` table feature is present, you are free to change clustering columns in any way (as long as they are in the schema).

> Clustering columns must be specified during the initial definition of a clustered table, and they can be modified after the table has been created.

Author: Hi @ryan-johnson-databricks , let me know what do you think about the @imback82 's comment thanks

> Clustering columns must be specified during the initial definition of a clustered table, and they can be modified after the table has been created.

Reviewer: On a second thought, we shouldn't restrict adding the "clustering" table feature only during table creation.

I think it should say the clustering columns can be set during the table creation, or they can be altered subsequent to the table creation.

Then, we can update the "Enablement" section and add that the "clustering" feature can be added during creation or later as long as the table has no partition columns.

> Clustering columns must be specified during the initial definition of a clustered table, and they can be modified after the table has been created.

Author: Thanks @imback82 for the input and I have reworded it in the followup [PR](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/pull/2294/files#r1394603773). Please take a look.

  If a new column is included in the clustering columns list, it is required for all table files to have statistics for these added columns.
- When a clustering implementation clusters files, writers must set the name of the clustering implementation in the `clusteringProvider` field when adding `add` actions for clustered files.
  - By default, a clustering implementation must only recluster files that have the field `clusteringProvider` set to the name of the same clustering implementation, or to the names of other clustering implementations that are superseded by the current clustering implementation. In addition, a clustering implementation may cluster any files with an unset `clusteringProvider` field (i.e., unclustered files).
  - Writer is not required to cluster a specific file at any specific moment.
  - A clustering implementation is free to add additional information such as adding a new user-controlled metadata domain to keep track of its metadata.

The following is an example for the `domainMetadata` action defintion of a table that leverages column mapping.
```json
{
  "domainMetadata": {
    "domain": "delta.clustering",

>     "configuration": "{\"clusteringColumns\":[{\"physicalName\":[\"col-daadafd7-7c20-4697-98f8-bff70199b1f9\"]}]}",

Reviewer: good idea, will update according to the suggestion!

>     "configuration": "{\"clusteringColumns\":[{\"physicalName\":[\"col-daadafd7-7c20-4697-98f8-bff70199b1f9\"]}]}",

Author: done, and addressed in the followup [PR](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/pull/2294/files#diff-62d56fa1c25dda8d49ccdbf9ea31df4576f84625706d54613dff0acc8f974d97R1086).

## Writer Requirements for Clustered Table

When the Clustered Table is supported (when the `writerFeatures` field of a table's `protocol` action contains `clustering`), then:
- Writers must track clustering column names in a `domainMetadata` action with `delta.clustering` as the `domain` and a `configuration` containing all clustering column names.
  If [Column Mapping](#column-mapping) is enabled, the physical column names should be used.
- Writers must write out [per-file statistics](#per-file-statistics) and per-column statistics for clustering columns in `add` action. 
  If a new column is included in the clustering columns list, it is required for all table files to have statistics for these added columns.

> - When a clustering implementation clusters files, writers must incorporate a `tag`  with `CLUSTERED_BY` as the key and the name of the clustering implementation as the corresponding value in the `add` actions for the clustered files.

Reviewer 3: Is a tag the right mechanism for this? Tags are kind of an escape hatch for things that aren't in the protocol. But if clustering becomes a first-class citizen and it is part of the core protocol, then this can be a proper field of the `addFile`. WDYT?

|    |-- tags: map<string,string>
|    |-- baseRowId: long
|    |-- defaultRowCommitVersion: long

> |    |-- clusteringProvider: string

Reviewer: It should be either partitioned or clustered. I think we should explicitly mention this in the spec. WDYT?

> |    |-- clusteringProvider: string

Reviewer 2: Definitely. Which means this example needs to be updated (split) to show both cases?

> |    |-- clusteringProvider: string

Author: I added a new writer rule that disallows partitioned table here. Let's discuss in the follow up [PR](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/pull/2294/files#diff-62d56fa1c25dda8d49ccdbf9ea31df4576f84625706d54613dff0acc8f974d97R1083). thanks
